The Project Gutenberg EBook of Tienhaarassa, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Tienhaarassa

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: December 4, 2006 [EBook #20020]

Language: Finnish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIENHAARASSA ***




Produced by Matti Järvinen








Tienhaarassa


Ensimmäisen kerran julkaissut
Raittiuden Ystävät 1908.




TIENHAARASSA.




Henkilöt:


Vilho Tuulos, pappi, 35-vuotias.
Aaro Koski, entinen lukiolainen, 30-vuotias.


Näyttämö: huone Tuuloksen kodissa. Tuulos ja Koski tulevat sisään.
Jälkimäinen on kalpea ja synkän näköinen, vaatteet kuluneet ja likaiset.


_Tuulos_: Käykää sisään -- olkaa hyvä! Tässä tuoli, istukaa, niin saamme
vähän puhella ja samalla lämmittää jähmettyneitä jäseniämme. Ulkona
onkin niin ankara sää. (Riisuu päällysvaatteensa Kosken yhä seisoessa.)
-- Istukaa, istukaa!

_Koski_: (uhmailen) Miksikä minä istuisin?

_Tuulos_: Tiedän teidän olevan väsyksissä. Te tarvitsette lepoa.

_Koski_: Lepoahan juuri etsin. Miksi ette sitä suonut minulle!

_Tuulos_: Nuori mies, synnin työt eivät meille koskaan lepoa tuota, ei
ajassa eikä ijankaikkisuudessa.

_Koski_: Mitä te minusta oikein tahdotte? Mikä profeetta te oikein
olette? Ja miksi pitää teidän aina minun tielleni joutuman?

_Tuulos_: Mitäkö teistä tahdon? -- Ihmistä! Kuka minä olen? -- Ystävä.
Ja kuka minut tiellenne tuo? -- Jumala.

_Koski_: Luoja! Älkää minulle niitä syöttäkö.

_Tuulos_: Jumala on todistajani.

_Koski_: Senkö vuoksi pidätte velvollisuutenanne puhua Jumalasta, että
olette pappi? -- Tiedätkö, pappi, että minun Jumalani on jo aikoja
sitten kuollut -- jos sitä koskaan on ollut olemassakaan -- ja uutta ei
synny enään, ei! Ja ihmisenä olen minä elämäni elänyt aina juhlasalista
loka viemäriin saakka, ja nyt on jälellä ainoastaan haaska, jonka äsken
tahdoin mereen haudata, mutta jonka te onnettomuudekseni estitte.

_Tuulos_: En minä, vaan Jumala, joka aina on ollut ja joka aina tulee
olemaan. -- Ystävä, olen teidät vain kolme kertaa elämässäni tavannut,
mutta joka kerta on minulla ollut selvänä, että te sydämenne syvyydessä
vielä säilytätte Jumalan kuvan.

-- -- Muistatteko ensi kertaa? -- Kaksi päihtynyttä miestä kulki
Kaarikatua pitkin. Sadatuksia ja rivoja sanoja tulvaili heidän
huuliltaan. Nuori tyttö riensi kadun poikki. Ennenkuin hän oli ehtinyt
väistää päihtyneitä, oli jo toinen heistä iskenyt häneen kyntensä.
Parahdus ja tukahtunut avunhuuto kuului, jonka perästä miehet alkoivat
raastaa saalistaan läheiseen solaan. Näin tämän tapahtuman etäämmältä ja
riensin tyttö paran avuksi, minkä ennätin. Mutta solalle päästyäni näin
hämmästyksekseni molemmat miehet keskenään kamppailemassa, ja toinen
heistä huusi vapisevalle tytölle: «pakene, tyttö, niin paljon kuin
jalkasi ennättävät!« --.

_Koski_: (on kuunnellut kädet silmillä.) Minä en voinut muuta, sillä
tytöllä oli sisareni silmät ja sisareni -- nimi.

_Tuulos_: Elikö sisarenne silloin vielä?

_Koski_: Ei, hän oli jo aikoja sitten kuollut.

_Tuulos_: Toisen kerran tapasin teidät Parviaisen myymälän edustalla.
Olin juuri jättänyt myymälän ja kulkenut hetkisen, kun huomasin
kadottaneeni lompakkoni. Tapasin teidät -- niinkuin jo sanoin --
myymälän edustalla ja kysyin, olitteko te sen löytänyt. -- »En», kuului
varma vastauksenne. »Olen teidät jo kerran ennen tavannut. Minä uskon
teitä», vastasin minä ja aijoin poistua. Silloin näin uudelleen sen,
mikä jo ensi kertaa tavatessamme kiinnitti huomiotani teihin -- valon
kipunan keskellä pimeyttä -- Te sanoitte: »Älkää uskoko, tässä on
lompakkonne. Antakaa minulle markka, en ole syönyt kahteen päivään». --

_Koski_: En voinut teidän luottamustanne pettää.

_Tuulos_: Se oli Jumalan kuvan välähdys sielussanne.

_Koski_: (itkee.) Älkää puhuko niin. Minä olen niin kurja -- kurja.

_Tuulos_: Äsken johdatti Jumala askeleeni meren rannalle. Siellä tapasin
teidät kolmannen kerran.

_Koski_: Se oli elämäni yhdennellätoista hetkellä.

_Tuulos_: Toivokaamme, että se oli elämänne ensimäisellä hetkellä, sillä
tuon murtavan syvyyden, joka uhkasi teidät niellä, olette välttänyt, ja
sen partaalta on nyt nouseva uusi ihminen, joka ottaa ensimäiset vakavat
askeleensa elämässä.

_Koski_: Minä en voi, minulla ei ole voimia. --

_Tuulos_: Jumalan avulla te voitte.

_Koski_: Mutta minä en usko Jumalaan, minä en voi!

_Tuulos_: Usko onkin Jumalan armolahja, joka teillekin annetaan.

_Koski_: (katsoo pitkään Tuulosta.) Te olette merkillinen ihminen Juuri
niin puhui äitinikin.

_Tuulos_: (Iloisesti hämmästyen). Vieläkö häntä muistelette?

_Koski_: Joskus -- niinkuin kaukaista ääntä.

_Tuulos_: Entä isäänne?

_Koski_: (Naurahtaa.) Häneltä minulla on kaksi muistoa, viinipikari ja
hengetön Jumalani.

_Tuulos_: Mies parka!

_Koski_: Sanokaas muuta! -- Mutta pääsee niillä edes helvettiin.

_Tuulos_: Älkää puhuko niin. Me olemme itse edesvastuunalaiset
töistämme.

_Koski_: Niinhän sitä saarnataan. Mutta minä sanon teille, että on sitä
syytä sysissä, jos on sepissäkin.

_Tuulos_: Puhukaa minulle jotakin äidistänne.

_Koski_: Hänestä raukasta ei ole paljon puhumista. Kärsi ja kuoli, siinä
kaikki. Ja sama on hänen poikansa edessä.

_Tuulos_: Minä uskon, että te vielä tulette onnelliseksi mailmassa.
Siitä joka ei kokonaan ole ihmisyyttään menettänyt, on aina toivoa. --
Tuottaisiko teille paljon tuskia, jos menneisyydestänne minulle vähän
kertoisitte? Minusta tuntuu kun näkymätön side yhdistäisi meidät.

_Koski_: (Katsoo Tuulosta ihmetellen.) Kuinka hyvä te olette, niin hyvä,
että se tällaisesta hunsvotista tuntuu uskomattomalta. -- Vaikka ette
minusta saakaan sellaista, kuin toivotte, niin voinhan kuitenkin kertoa
teille vähän elämästäni, kun kerran viitsitte kuunnella. Selviäähän
teille edes se, etten minä aina ole tällainen renttu ollut.

_Tuulos_: Kertokaa!

_Koski_: No niin. Se on vaan palanen juomarin elämää, ei muuta. --

Isäni oli maaseutukaupungissa kauppiaana. Kotiamme pidettiin
mallikelpoisena niinkuin isäänikin taattuna liikemiehenä. Vieraita kävi
meillä paljon. Silloin oli isä aina hyvällä päällä sekä ystävällinen
kaikille. Ruokia ja juomia ei suinkaan puuttunut, ja vaikka isä ei itse
liikoja maistellut, piti hän kuitenkin velvollisuutenaan vieraitaan
siihen kehoittaa. Perheen keskuudessa hän taasen oli liiankin
harvapuheinen ja säännöllinen. Lapset pelkäsivät häntä ja palvelijat
nimittivät häntä aina keskinäisissä puheissaan tyranniksi. Äiti esiintyi
aina hiljaisena ja vaatimattomana sekä pidoissa että arkielämässä. Ei
häntä paljon huomattukaan, sillä isän valtikka ulottui kodin
pimeimpäänkin soppeen. Lapset vain huolestuneina huomasivat, miten äidin
posket kalpenivat vuosi vuodelta.

Niin sitä sitten elettiin. Muistan erään juhla-illan, joka samalla
sattui olemaan minun neljästoista syntymäpäivä. Oli tavallisuuden mukaan
vieraita ja isä oli hyvällä tuulella. Muistaen minun merkkipäiväni piti
hän puheen ja pani viinipikarin käteen. Kilistettiin ja onniteltiin
minua perheen tulevaa tukea ja liikkeen jatkajaa. Olin kyllä ennenkin
maistellut kodissa tarjotuita juomia, vaikkei näin huomattavalla
tavalla. Sinä iltana olin ensi kerran humalassa, ja seuraavana aamuna
sain isältä selkäsaunan.

Siitä lähin alkoi toinen ääni kellossa soida. En enää saanut isän nähden
tarttua viinipikariin, mutta sen sijaan tartuin siihen sitä useammin
isän näkemättä. Äiti kyllä näki ja tiesi, mutta peläten isän ankaruutta
hän salasi kaikki ja koetti hiljaisuudessa vaikuttaa herättämällä
minussa uskonnollisia tunteita. Se tavallaan ensin onnistuikin. -- Niin
kului pari vuotta. Silloin isä matkusti kauppamatkoille ulkomaille. Kun
hän sieltä palasi, oli hänessä tapahtunut muutos, sanoivat hänen saaneen
herätyksen. Kotioloissa tuo herätys ilmeni siinä, että vieraita kävi
harvemmin ja väkijuomia tarjottiin vähemmän kuin ennen, mutta sen sijaan
alettiin pitää säännöllisiä aamu- ja iltasaarnoja. Rangaistuksen uhalla
oli jokaisen perheenjäsenen niissä oltava läsnä.

Herätysaikaan kuului myöskin entistä säännöllisempi kotijärjestys.
Minuutilleen piti jokaisen olla ruokahuoneessa odottamassa isää
aterioimiseen määrättyinä hetkinä. Ken ei ollut läsnä, kun hän tuli, jäi
ilman ateriaa. Yhdeksän jälkeen illalla ei kukaan saanut luvatta talosta
poistua ja samaan kellon lyömään piti jokaisen kylässä olijan laittautua
kotiin. Peläten tämän järjestyksen rikkomista, salpasi isä aina illalla
poikansa huoneen oven ulkoapäin, unhottaen, että ikkunaakin saattoi
hätätilassa ovena käyttää.

En tiedä mitä tämä herätysaika toisiin vaikutti, mutta minusta ainakin
tuli täysi pakana, ja hukkaan menivät äiti paran hiljaiset neuvot.
Raskaalta tämä taisi hänestä tuntua, sillä hän joutui viimein vuoteen
omaksi ja kuoli. Sen jälkeen tuli koti entistä ahtaammaksi. Ainoana
ilona oli enää pikku sisko, mutta hänkin oli niin hento ja heikko, että
pelkäsi hänen joka tuulahduksella sammuvan.

_Tuulos_: Ystävä parka, kuinka minä säälin teitä.

_Koski_: Ehkä olisi minustakin tullut roistoa parempi, jos edes pikku
sisko olisi saanut elää, mutta hänkin jätti minut. (Painaa kädet
silmilleen.)

_Tuulos_: Entä isänne?

_Koski_: Minä karkasin kotoa ja isäni kirosi minut. Mutta käteeni
painamansa viinapikari jäi siihen, ja sitä olen minä ammentanut vuodet
pitkät. -- Noin kolme vuotta karkaamiseni jälkeen kuulin, että isäni oli
kuollut ja määrännyt omaisuutensa armeliaisuuslaitoksiin. -- Pikku
siskolle oli hän määrännyt eläkkeen, mutta sitä ei hän kauan tarvinnut.

_Tuulos_: Kun ajattelen, mitä kaikkea te olette saanut kokea, niin
tunnen sydämeni tuskasta kouristuvan. Mutta minä arvelen kuitenkin, että
ei niin pimeätä yötä, jossa ei joku valonkipuna olisi sinkoillut, eikä
niin kurjaa ihmiselämää, jota ei joku onnensäde olisi valaissut. Ettekö
näe sielunne silmäin edessä jotain sellaista valonhetkeä?

_Koski_: Olisi kai minullakin, jos vaan tohtisin niitä muistella.

_Tuulos_: Miksikä ette?

_Koski_: Tuntisin vain syvemmin kurjuuteni, ja täytyisi taas saada
viinaa mistä hinnasta hyvänsä.

_Tuulos_: Hennoisitteko todella upottaa viinan huumaukseen puhtaimmat,
rakkaimmat muistonne? Silloin ette niille arvoa anna. Ei, muistelkaa,
ajatelkaa niin usein kuin voitte rakkaitanne, äitiänne ja siskoanne,
muistelkaa pienintäkin tapausta, minkä elitte heidän kanssansa. Mikä
teitä silloin lämmitti, se lämmittää vieläkin.

_Koski_: (Tuuloksen puhuessa on hänen päänsä painunut alas, mutta hetken
kuluttua nostaa hän sen ylös ja lämmin hohde näkyy silmissä.) -- -- On
minulla vielä muisto äidiltä. (Vetää povestaan likaisen paperikäärön,
avaa sen ja ottaa esille pienen, kellahtaneen nenäliinan.) -- Tämä
tässä, se on ainoa, mikä minulla on jälellä, muut olen juonut.

_Tuulos_: Ja mitä tämä kertoo?

_Koski_: Se voisi teille kertoa paljon, enempi kuin minä voinkaan. --
Olin tullut myöhään yöllä kotiin -- ikkunasta, niinkuin tavallisesti --
ja heittäytynyt vuoteelleni. Kuulin silloin oveani raotettavan ja
ummistin silmäni. Äiti tuli hiljaa luokseni ja luullen minun nukkuvan
polvistui hän vuoteeni ääreen. Sydäntäni kouristi ja tuntui, kuin en
voisi hengittää. Aioin heittäytyä hänen kaulaansa ja rukoilla häneltä
anteeksi, mutta jäseneni olivat kuin kangistuneet. Silmäni pysyivät
ummessa, ja minä makasin ikäänkuin tiedotonna. Kun viimein sain silmäni
auki oli äiti poissa. -- Vuoteeni vierestä löysin tämän kyynelistä
märkänä. Silloin vannoin, ettei äitini koskaan enään tarvitsisi minun
tähteni öitänsä valvoa. -- Olenko valani pitänyt, sen voitte itse
päättää. -- Nenäliinan olen kuitenkin säilyttänyt uskollisesti, ja se on
ainoa kappele, mikä minulla vielä on isän kodista. --

_Tuulos_: Voitteko te luottaa minuun?

_Koski_: Te kohtelette minua niinkuin ihmistä, ettekä niinkuin roistoa
ja kulkuria, ja senvuoksi luotan teihin.

_Tuulos_: Kiitos sanoistanne! Silloin myös uskotte, kun sanon teille:
minä olen vakuutettu, että äitinne rukoukset eivät ole hukkaan menneet.
-- Sanokaa, ettekö itse toivoisi niiden toteutuvan?

_Koski_: Olenhan sitä toivonut, mutta minkä sille voi, kun kerta on
juomariksi ruvennut.

_Tuulos_: Te heitätte viinan. Ette nauti pisaraakaan enään tuota
myrkkyjuomaa.

_Koski_: Te ette tunne viinan voimaa, ja senvuoksi on teidän hyvä puhua.
Jos tietäisitte, kuinka monta kertaa olen päättänyt, etten ikinä enää
pulloon koske, mutta yhtä monta kertaa minä olen nuo päätökset rikkonut
niinkuin valanikin, josta äsken puhuin. -- Ja sitä paitsi en minä voi
enää elää ilman viinaa.

_Tuulos_: Te voitte. Monta on viinaan kuollut, mutta ei kukaan ole vielä
viinan puutteesta menehtynyt. -- Ettekö ole koskaan etsinyt apua
taisteluissanne?

_Koski_: Mistä?

_Tuulos_: Ylhäältä. Häneltä, joka kaikkien oikea isä on, yksin
juomarinkin.

_Koski_: Ei sitä sieltä ole saatavissa. Ei ylhäälle voi pyrkiä se, jota
vaan vetää alaspäin.

_Tuulos_: Löytyy keino, joka estää teitä vajoamasta.

_Koski_: Mikä se olisi?

_Tuulos_: Rukous.

_Koski_: Sitä en tunne.

_Tuulos_: Teidän täytyy se tuntea. Teidän täytyy rukoilla voimia
Jumalalta. Hän yksin auttaa teitä.

_Koski_: Ei sellaiset temput minua auta. Ne ovat lapsia varten.

_Tuulos_: Mies, jos teidän äitinne muisto on kallis, niin rukoilkaa
Jumalaa, joka oli hänenkin ainoana lohdutuksena. Rukoilkaa, rukoilkaa,
vaikka ette uskoisikaan, rukoilkaa siksi, kunnes uskon valo koittaa
sielussanne, ja se koittaa viimein, se on varma, niinkuin Jumalan olemus
on varma ja luja.

_Koski_: (Epäröiden.) Minustako, juomarista ja valapatosta tulisi vielä
ihminen? Minä olen niin kurja.

_Tuulos_: Ette kurjempi kuin tuhlaajapoika. Ja hänestä raamattu kertoo:
»Kun hän vielä kaukana oli isän huoneesta, näki hänen isänsä hänet,
juoksi häntä vastaan, syleili ja suuteli häntä».

_Koski_: Ja antoi hänelle uuden puvun, sormuksen käteen ja uudet kengät.
Äitini kertoi tuon vertauksen minulle lapsena ollessani, ja minä pidin
niin paljon siitä.

_Tuulos_: Se on Vapahtajan oma ilmoitus meille syntisille. -- --
(Viereisessä huoneessa soi telefooni.) Odottakaa, minua kutsutaan
telefooniin. -- (Menee viereiseen huoneeseen ja puhuu telefooniin.) --
Halloh! -- 524 -- Kyllä se olen minä. Vai niin, vai niin, sepä ikävää!
-- Oliko se Ratakatu 5? Kyllä tulen. -- Neljännes-tunnin kuluttua. --
Hyvästi! (kuuluu loppumerkki, tulee sisään) -- Minut kutsuttiin sairaan
luo. Mutta te jäätte tänne. Minun kotini on tästä lähin oleva teidänkin
kotinne siksi kunnes rehellisellä työllä voitte sellaisen itsellenne
hankkia. -- Älkää epäilkö jäädä tänne. Aluksi autatte minua. Minä
tarvitsen apua sekä yhdessä että toisessa työssä, ja te olette siihen
juuri sopiva. Minä asun täällä äitini kanssa, ja hän on oleva teidänkin
äitinne, olkaa varma siitä. -- --

(Puuhaa lähtöänsä ja puhuu samalla iloisesti.)

-- -- -- Kas niin, nyt olen valmis. Jumalan haltuun nyt, ystävä hyvä! --
Viereisessä huoneessani on vuode, jossa voitte levätä. Tai jos tahdotte
lukea, on siellä ja myöskin täällä kirjallisuutta. -- Pistäydyn äidin
luona ilmoittamassa, että minulla on vieras, joka tarvitsee kelpo
aterian. Parin tunnin kuluttua olen taasen luonanne. -- Terve näkemiin!

(Poistuu.)

_Koski_: (Itsekseen.) Tämä on kuin unta, josta ei tiedä olisiko paras
herätä, vaiko yhä vaan uneksia. -- (Katselee ympärilleen.) -- Täällä
tuntuu olo niin turvalliselta. Löytäneeköhän synti ollenkaan tähän
majaan tietänsä? -- (Suoristaa itseänsä.) -- Uusi puku, sormus käteen ja
uudet kengät -- vanhoilla ei enää astuta sitä polkua, mikä tästä
huoneesta johtaa. -- (Lyyhistyy.) -- Mutta jäsenet tuntuvat niin
kankeilta, lihakset niin veltoilta. Sinä olet jo lahoa puuta, Koski.
Lieneekö sinussa enää miestä pukeutua uuteen pukuun? Ja pysyykö se sinun
päälläsi, vai soluuko pois samaa tietä. -- -- Olet niin kauvan loassa
rypenyt, että se on ennättänyt kovettua ympärillesi. Pääsetkö siitä, vai
onko jo sielu imenyt itsensä täyteen sen saastaa? -- -- -- Mitä sinä
tuumit, Koski? Jäätkö tänne, vai -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Olet jo niin
tottunut huonoon ilmaan, että sitä kaipaat. -- (Nousee levotonna.) --
Kahden tunnin kuluessa ennättää jo pitkälle, -- -- ei hän sitten enää
löydä. -- -- -- Mutta kuinka sinä voit ainoan hyväntekijäsi pettää,
Koski? -- Pettääkö! -- -- -- -- -- En -- -- minä vain säästän hänet
pettymykseltä -- säästän, sen teen, säästän! -- -- -- -- -- (Etsii
lakkiaan. Kiiruhtaa ulkoovea kohti, avaa sen, mutta jää siihen
seisomaan.) -- -- Hyvästi -- hyvästi kaikki! -- -- -- -- -- (Vie äkkiä
kätensä povelleen.) Missä on nenäliina? -- -- (Huomaa nenäliinan
pöydällä ja palaa sitä ottamaan.) -- -- -- Sitä en jätä. -- -- Miten hän
taas sanoikaan? (Hitaasti.) «Olen vakuutettu, että äitinne rukoukset
eivät ole -- -- hukkaan -- menneet«. -- -- -- -- -- -- -- Äiti -- äiti!

(Sortuu tuolille pöydän ääreen ja painaa itkien kasvonsa nenäliinaan.)

_(Esirippu alas.)_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Tienhaarassa, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TIENHAARASSA ***

***** This file should be named 20020-8.txt or 20020-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/0/2/20020/

Produced by Matti Järvinen

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

